RFC: Custom styling (#25333)
microsoft/fluentui: rfcs/react-components/convergence/custom-styling.md

# RFC: Custom Styling

Geoff Cox

## Summary

Fluent UI React v9 is built today to enforce adopting the Fluent 2 design styles.
Partners creating component libraries cannot provide their customers the ability to deviate from Fluent 2 design
like they could with v0, v7, or v8.
We need to define a custom styling escape hatch and pattern for these partners.

## Background

> Fluent UI React v9 strongly conforms to the Fluent 2 Design to provide consistency in component behavior, layout, and style. Most partners are expected to adopt the Fluent 2 Design and remove custom styling that deviates from the design direction for Office.

Reviewer: Nit
```suggestion
Fluent UI React v9 strongly conforms to the Fluent 2 Design to provide consistency in component behavior, layout, and style. Most partners are expected to adopt the Fluent 2 Design and remove custom styling that deviates from the design direction of Fluent.
```

v9 provides several mechanisms to customize components:

- custom themes
- custom design tokens
- CSS classes & styles built with Griffel
- component part replacement using slots
- component recomposition using hooks

Some of our partner teams are building component libraries on top of Fluent UI React.
They have customers who need to diverge from the Fluent 2 design for both the partners components and our components.
Our partners need a mechanism where their customers could customize the specific style elements of components
(e.g. button border) without undue effort.

Our current customization mechanisms have several limitations:

- design tokens don't provide the granularity of customization needed
- the CSS vars for each design token have a ceiling of ~300 before performance degrades
- CSS classes create tight binding to style selector implementation or encounter CSS specificity issues.
- slot replacement and CSS classes require code modification at each call site

> - recomposing every component requires signficant effort and creates a new component type that

Reviewer 2: I think re-composing (wrapping) components might make it harder to re-use code. Having styles baked into the theme makes it wicked easy for teams to adopt styles created by another team. The whole thing can be done in a single file.

I imagine many teams will also run into issues separating concerns. I'm thinking teams will likely put their telemetry and styling opinions in the same HOC, which is icky. This use case is so common we'd be saving teams a lot of effort by baking it into Fluent in the first place.

  must be adopted at each call site.

These limitations are by design to either meet performance requirements, avoid bloating the API with kitchen-sink props,
are limitations from target browsers or web languages/frameworks, or avoid past mistakes in previous versions.

### Case: _Partner customer who needs centralized custom styling_

//TODO: Mason and/or Brandon to fill in from admin-controls
//TODO: Geoff to fill in power-platform custom

## Problem statement

We need to define a mechanism to allow:

> - consumers of Fluent UI React to centrally customize styles of components

Reviewer 2: Consider re-phrasing for clarity:

- consumers of Fluent UI React to override the css of all the dom elements of a specified component within a given context.

# RFC: Custom Styling

Geoff Cox
Ben Howell
Mason Tejera
Brandon Thomas

## Summary

Fluent UI React v9 is built today to enforce adopting the Fluent 2 design styles. Partners creating component
libraries don't know how provide their customers the ability to deviate from Fluent 2 design like they could
with v0, v7, or v8.

> We need to define a custom styling mechanism or pattern for these partners.

Reviewer 3: From what i've seen, it's not just our partner's customers...it's our own customers. Product X has different brand colors, so they tweak the theme. But those theme tweaks don't give them the colors they want/need for the Checkbox, so they need to manually adjust the Checkbox for their app.

## Background

Fluent UI React v9 strongly conforms to the Fluent 2 Design to provide consistency in component behavior, layout,
and style. Most partners are expected to adopt the Fluent 2 Design and remove custom styling that deviates from the
design direction for Office.

Some of our partner teams are building component libraries on top of Fluent UI React.

> They have customers who need to diverge from the Fluent 2 design for both the partners components and our components.

Reviewer 2: I think just about every team I've worked with has to diverge from Fluent in some form.

Our partners need a way for their customers to customize the specific style elements of components
(e.g. button border) without undue effort.

v9 provides several mechanisms to customize components:

- custom themes
- custom design tokens
- CSS classes & styles built with Griffel
- component part replacement using slots
- component recomposition using hooks

These mechanisms have several limitations:

- design tokens don't provide the same granularity of customization as v0, v7, or v8

> - the number of CSS vars has an upper limit of ~300 before performance degrades

Reviewer 2: MADS itself has about 200 slots dedicated to color alone. Leaving 100 for everything else from borders to fonts feels very limiting.

a method for each component, but that causes a circular dependency problem for components.

There may some typescript trickery that would allow for a single context value type, but having each component define
the context type it will inspect for custom styling follows SOLID dependency inversion.

### Pros

- Custom styling gets the same power as the default component useStyles hook.
- This builds on using slots as the addressable items for applying styles.
- The custom styles can be built using Griffel with build-time optimization.
- Can be applied at different scope like FluentProvider.
- Does not require composing or introduce a new component type that must be adopted in lieu of the default component.
- Fewer CSS specificity problems as styles can get overwritten.
- Provides the type-safety expected from Fluent UI React.
- Minimal code to add to each component. Could be put into the code generation template.
- Does not significantly effect rendering performance.
- Partners building components can follow the same practice to support custom styling in their libraries.

### Cons

> - Custom styling all components requires adding and configuration lots of context providers.

Reviewer 2: Does this require separate context providers? The v8 system does it all with one and a key value pair system.

I think it's be mission critical to bake this into the existing FluentProvider.

Author: The v8 theme provider is customizing the theme object, customizing the styles is typed per component (e.g. IButtonStyles).  Since on of Fluent's key features is type safety, my PoC would define a specific context type for each component so that the useXXXXStyles hooks would the XXXXState -> XXXXState.

- Requires writing new code for every component, adding a story, and documenting the feature.
- Context is harder to discover as it is outside the props contract.
- Callers doing custom styling may still take a dependency on the CSS internals of the component if they don't replace a
  style block completely.

## Option B: Demonstrate recomposition for partners to define their own style customization systems

The hooks composition model was architected to separate concerns of component behavior, style, and rendering.

> Rather than provide an additional mechanism for custom styling, this option would assist partners with leveraging

Reviewer 2: I don't think token system scales well enough to meet the needs of apps with hundreds of engineers and designers.

- It assumes tokens are always applied in a semantically correct way. I know this is not a safe assumption. I see designers and engineers mis-applying semantic slots in v8 all the time. Not ideal, but it's reality. For tokens to scale effectively, Designers and Engineers will need to know with 100% certainty across several libraries which tokens are being used to prevent regressions. The issue gets even more complicated when end feature developers start consuming themes from multiple Fluent extensions.

- Teams are going to run out of headroom real quick if they're only able to customize via 300 tokens. For color alone, MADS uses about 150 semantic slots because the base 70 we get from Fluent weren't enough. Add more for corner radius, elevation, thicknesses, etc and we'll run out of accurately named tokens really quick.

Providing a centralized way to override the styles of a specific component provides a complimentary solution to token  based styling.

Author: FWIW, the hook recomposition approach is different than adding new tokens. What you wrote does apply to adding more tokens to the system and the theme fragility problem is tough to solve.  When a new component recomposes another one using hooks, the style hook should use the same set of design tokens available in v9.

Author: Rereading - good point.  Resolving this conversation as the content has been updated to reflect the concern over 300 tokens. If someone goes over 300 tokens, the system still works it just performs a little more slowly and bundling size slows initial load of the application.

Recomposing every component could be made easier with a compose method that hid some of the details of the ForwardRef
and sequencing the hook.

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';
import { compose } from '@fluentui/react-components';
import type { ButtonProps } from '@fluentui/react-components';
import { useCustomButtonStyles } from '../styling/button';

// This is a rough idea of what a compose method might look like.
export const Button = compose<ButtonProps>('Button', useButton_unstable, useCustomButtonStyles, renderButton_unstable);
```

> Ben Howell is working on a proof-of-concept for this compose method.
> It is likely something worth doing regardless of the outcome of this RFC.
> The compose method could be called from our own components to reduce boilerplate code.

### Improvement - generating a recomposed package

We could create an nx generator that produces all the boilerplate component recomposition code.
This would allow partners to create an unstyled or custom library easily.
Partners could re-run the tool to keep up with new components shipping in react-components.

```
yarn create-recomposed-library my-components
```

### Open issues

### Pros

> - doesn't add yet another way to customize styles to the architecture

Reviewer 2: This would fall in the con category for our team. Exposing more knobs and levers to solve problems is a good thing. We can't ever anticipate all the corner cases or problems a team will face, and exposing as many mechanisms as possible and letting teams decide which ones to use can only empower consuming teams.

Author: I agree that we need to avoid being too restrictive.  I would rephrase to say solving the problem of limited customization with the fewest mechanisms possible is the goal.  Each way of doing things makes callers have to ponder which one to use, increases maintenance and documentation cost, and makes future upgrades harder.

- uses the hooks composition model for its intended purpose, to handle special cases of customization
- partners get complete control over customization (vs. limitations that may come from a style-only customizer)
- allows replacement of Griffel with a different styling system
- supports tree-shaking out the hooks that are not used
- follows out recommended dependency abstraction approach for partners with large and complex code bases to make future migration easier.

> ### Cons

Reviewer 2: I think another con here is that is discourages code re-use. Right now bundling styles with the theme makes it really fast and easy for teams to share a theme, which ironically helps push towards coherence.

> - does not provide partners with an out-of-the-box solution

Reviewer 2: These two are big cons for our consumers. I see so many teams leveraging the analogous system from v8 that we're forcing engineering teams to each own a lot of boilerplate that Fluent has historically owned.

- non-trivial effort to create a library with every component re-exported
- maintenance cost keeping up with new and changed components

> - our style hooks are currently monolithic. We may need to create building block style hooks designed for re-use

Reviewer 4: I think this is one of the most important things to take into consideration if we take this approach. We would really need to think hard about how to best split the styles so they can be reused. On the upside (and maybe we can put this in the pro section), this would allow people to use the other bits of our components without paying for the price of styling if they want to completely strip away the Fluent v2 styles.

Author: Yes - we need to have a separate discussion/RFC about styling hook composition and the CSS as an API contract.

# RFC: Custom Styling

## Contributors

Geoff Cox
Mason Tejera - MADS use cases
Ben Howell - easier recomposition
Micah Godbolt - component CSS vars

## Summary

Fluent UI React v9 is built today to adopt the Fluent 2 design as its default style.

Partners migrating from v0/v8 to v9 have brought up that v9's custom styling does not
provide the same granularity of customization as previous versions.

> Partners are concerned their customers won't be able to deviate from the Fluent 2 design.

Reviewer 5: We should rephrase this to something like `customers won't be able to adapt Fluent 2 to their specific scenarios`. Deviate has very negative connotation here and most partners aren't interested in simply doing things differently for no reason. It's just that Microsoft has such a huge range of products and customers it's impossible to address every possible need with a single design. We need to be able to adapt while still having something that feels like a family of products. Most want 90% of what is there and to be able to add small adjustments where it makes sense. The choices we're asking them to make currently in v9 is take this or nothing. Many, unfortunately, will choose nothing or to stay on v8 if they have to compromise their product.

Please see the appendix for partner use cases and scenarios.

This RFC considers different options for adding new custom styling mechanisms or improving existing ones.

## Current Theme and Style Customizations

There are several mechanisms for customizing the theme and style of components in v9.
Different mechanisms allow different scopes of customization: all components, components of a specific type, or
individual instances of a component.

> ### Don't

Reviewer 6: (me) a random person looking into this RFC, shouldn't this be labelled as `anti-goals` or similar?, `don't` title is confusing, it seems like the intention is that `V9` should not do it, which is quite the opposite of the RFC isn't it?.

# RFC: Custom Styling

## Contributors

- Geoff Cox
- Mason Tejera - MADS use cases
- Ben Howell - easier recomposition
- Micah Godbolt - component CSS vars

## Summary

Fluent UI React v9 is built today to adopt the Fluent 2 design as its default style. We strongly recommend that
Microsoft applications leverage the default style and limit customization to a brand-based theme.

Currently, v9 has mechanisms to support several customization scenarios:

- Custom themes => Customize style values for all components
- `classname` prop => Customize the style of one instance of a component
- Extended design tokens => Support theme for a custom component or custom class/style
- Hooks recomposition => Create a new component customizing the behavior, style, or rendering of an existing component.

See the appendix for more detailed analysis of the capabilities and limitations of each of these mechansisms.

## Problem

Partners migrating from v0/v8 to v9 have brought up that v9's custom styling does not provide the same granularity of
customization as previous versions. See the appendix for detailed partner use cases and scenarios.

> Partners producing component libaries or component design surfaces are the most concerned about the lack of

Author: But Homer Simpson says libaries :D

customization. They would like to customize the style of a single type of component without changing the style of
other components.

Example: Change the border radius and border width of all Button components without changing those styles for
Input components.

## Option A: React.Context useCustomStyles hooks

Each component could check context for a useCustomStyle hook within the useComponentStyle hook.
If this hook was defined, it is called at the end of the method before returning state.

> These example use Component as a substitute for a component like Button or Avatar.

```tsx
const customStyles = useContextSelector(ComponentCustomStylesContext, context => context?.useCustomStyles);

//...component styling here

> return customStyles ? customStyles(state) : state;

Reviewer 7: nit: Technically, `customStyles()` would need to be unconditionally called hook to comply with rules of hooks and to allow `makeStyles` to be used in it.

Author: Great point! I'll think about this some more while I'm playing with this option.  It certainly puts a wrench in conditionally calling it.

Reviewer 8: It's another question actually: is there need to have `useCustomStyle` hook of it could be just a `customStyle` function? Using hooks will have limitations.

Author: I think it has to be a hook if they use Griffel right? makeStyles returns a hook they would call to apply class names to state just like the components useStyle hook.

```

> Each component defines own types for props and state, so would need to define its own context value types,

Reviewer 7: How do you expect nested overrides to work? Should the hook consume the outer context and call `customStyles` recursively?

Author: Ooo.  Hadn't thought of it from the point of view.  I was thinking it would only consume the closest containing context and wouldn't call any farther up the tree.

Reviewer 8: If it will be a chain, it makes impossible to get rid of the previous custom styles:

```jsx
function App() {
  return (
    <ComponentCustomStylesContextProvider value={{ useCustomStyles }}>
      {/* I don't want this 👆 anymore 👿 */}
      <ComponentCustomStylesContextProvider value={{ useCustomStyles: null }}>
        {/* If this will be a chain, then oops 💥 */}
        <Component>Hello custom styles!</Component>
      </ComponentCustomStylesContextProvider>
    </ComponentCustomStylesContextProvider>
  );
}
```

Reviewer 5: I think we need to think about the use cases and maybe there's a need for both? I think most cases people won't want to completely start from scratch but build off what is already there. That's what we have seen the most on our end and how the previous style model worked. However, I could also see it being useful to say "No, I want nothing that was here previously, wipe it all out". Could we pass an option to ignore context up the tree? This might also be a more performant path.

Author: The expectation is that customization would take place at the top level of the application.  In option A3, the object on context would be be replaced by another FluentProvider and we won't merge objects (lesson learned from v8).  Callers applying lower level customization will need to handle any merging of objects by spreading existing methods as the default to their customizations.

```

> Ben Howell is working on a proof-of-concept for this compose method.
> It is likely something worth doing regardless of the outcome of this RFC.
> The compose method could be called from our own components to reduce boilerplate code.

### 💡 Improvement - generating a recomposed package

We could create an nx generator that produces all the boilerplate component recomposition code.
This would allow partners to create an unstyled or custom library easily.
Partners could re-run the tool to keep up with new components shipping in react-components.

```
yarn create-recomposed-library my-components
```

### 👍

- doesn't add yet another way to customize styles to the architecture
- uses the hooks composition model for its intended purpose, to handle special cases of customization
- partners get complete control over customization (vs. limitations that may come from a style-only customizer)
- allows replacement of Griffel with a different styling system
- supports tree-shaking out the hooks that are not used
- follows out recommended dependency abstraction approach for partners with large and complex code bases to make future migration easier.

### 👎

> 

Reviewer 7: One more 👎: this approach does not affect (reusable) components which are implemented out of the application's source.
Use case: An application wants to change border radius for all buttons in the app. If the application "embeds" a 3rd party HVC as an npm dependency (or even via a script tag) - the buttons in that HVC will not have the border radius changed.

- does not provide partners with an out-of-the-box solution
- non-trivial effort to create a library with every component re-exported
- maintenance cost keeping up with new and changed components

> - our style hooks are currently monolithic. We may need to create building block style hooks designed for re-use

Author: ```suggestion
- our style hooks are currently monolithic. We may need to create building block style hooks designed for re-use
- does not affect (reusable) components which are implemented outside the application's source.
```

    hover: {
      backgroundColor: tokens.colorNeutralBackground1Hover,
    }
    active: {
      backgroundColor: tokens.colorNeutralBackground1Pressed
    },
    outline: {
      backgroundColor: tokens.colorTransparentBackground,
      hover: {
        backgroundColor: tokens.colorTransparentBackgroundHover
      },
      active: {
        backgroundColor: tokens.colorTransparentBackgroundPressed
      }
    }
  },
  icon: {
    small: {
      spacing: tokens.spacingHorizontalXS
    },
    medium: {
      spacing: tokens.spacingHorizontalSNudge
    },
    large: {
      spacing: tokens.spacingHorizontalSNudge
    }
  }
}
```

### 👍

- Codifies the mapping of component part style to alias token.
- Build time substitution allows for continued build time style optimizations
- Runtime CSS vars are unchanged and works with existing themes
- Provides a similar experience to custom styles and theme component styles from v8, but mapped to slots.

### 👎

- Exports yet another set of constants for the bundle
- Adds some complexity to the style hooks

### 🤔

- Would the hierarchy of component tokens be a contract?

## Decision making

//TODO @Geoff

> ## Appendix: Partner scenarios

Reviewer 7: Do we have any other write up of the scenarios we want to address?
Why I am asking is that I generally see two different approaches in the RFC:
- Option A and B allow to override/extend the component with any arbitrary styles.
- Option C and D add 'component variables' as another extension option to the components.

The arbitrary styles allow the partners to tweak "everything" but also to break "anything", making the component styles part of the API.

On the other hand, component variables is an enumerated finite list of options which can be implemented without leaking the component styles. With that approach we can keep the implementation under control and covered by tests. Those might be complex and insufficient, though - we will not test all permutations of all variables and possible values.
Also, obviously, there will always be a `style` which will not be exposed as a component variable but a partner will urgently need to tweak that one - in that case, will we support both?

Reviewer 2: I like option A and B :-) It's not our responsibility if teams break or deviate. It also saves us wasted time bickering about what should and shouldn't be exposed for customization.

### MADS: Centro use case

from Mason Tejera

> Our primary customer for applying component specific styles via the ThemeProvider has been Centro. The Core mission of Centro is to allow engineering team to build experiences (UX + Backend) one time and ship them to any hosting application(s). They are a horizontal engineering team that services Commercial and Consumer experiences. They surface many of their experiences across multiple apps & platforms and require them to look native to the end user. This sort of functionality saves Centro and their consumers a LOT of engineering time. A couple specific examples of how they use it:

Reviewer 7: It would be great if we could hear more from @mltejera on this one.
One of the goals of v9 vs v8/0 was to allow experiences reusable across apps without requiring any style tweaks by implementing Fluent Design + tokens. Here I read the situation is worse in v9.
If that's the case, we need to learn from that and also share the learning with design and wider audience.

This might be a temporary problem which will be solved by applications moving to the Fluent design - then it is fine and we must help these partners as much as possible to make their migration path smooth.

This might also be a permanent problem - those are applications which do not adhere to Fluent design - then we should question whether they should stick to Fluent UI or use something else (like we can provide them with unstyled components).

Reviewer 2: Sure Miro - I do think this is a permanent problem/opportunity inherent in a company with as much breadth as Microsoft.

A goal to 'minimize style changes' is very limiting at a company with our a diverse a user base as Microsoft. The better goal should be that Fluent can be used by kindergartners in the EDU space, IT Pro's, gamers, and on the go in every day life. 

Our users are on EVERY modern computing platform - iOS, Android, MacOS, Windows, Web and probably more we don't know of today. An app should look and feel like a hybrid of Fluent and iOS when it's on a phone, and a hybrid of Fluent and Windows when on a desktop browser.

A token based system assumes we can predict every place and way consumers will want to customize.  I know from 3+ years of working on a Fluent extension library that this is not a safe assumption. We (Fluent) needs to be more humble. I've seen enough diversity in the IT Pro space alone that Fluent needs a richer customization story beyond tokens.

We have research that shows most internal Fluent consumers are using Fluent through an extension library. We should always assume the consuming team knows more about their users than we ever will, and that they are highly skilled professionals that are on the same Microsoft Team.

I've met apps teams who've looked at v9 and are deciding to stick with v8 because v9 is too opinionated. Worse, some are deciding to move to a 3rd party solution because v8 support has stopped. We're getting 0% coherence because we're unable to budge from 98% to 90%. We have to assume those teams have solid reasons for needing that extra 8%.

I think *every* styling opinion in the library should be efficient and scalable to disagree with. We should provide the mechanisms to do so instead of telling each team create their own customization layer. This maximizes code re-use across the company and will ultimately improve coherence.

- Custom themes => Customize style values for all components
- `classname` prop => Customize the style of one instance of a component
- Extended design tokens => Support theme for a custom component or custom class/style
- Hooks recomposition => Create a new component customizing the behavior, style, or rendering of an existing component.

See the appendix for more detailed analysis of the capabilities and limitations of each of these mechansisms.

## Problem

Partners migrating from v0/v8 to v9 have brought up that v9's custom styling does not provide the same granularity of
customization as previous versions. See the appendix for detailed partner use cases and scenarios.

Partners producing component libraries or component design surfaces are the most concerned about the lack of
customization. They would like to customize the style of a single type of component without changing the style of
other components.

Example: Change the border radius and border width of all Button components without changing those styles for
Input components.

## Option A: React.Context useCustomStyles hooks

Each component could check context for a useCustomStyle hook within the useComponentStyle hook.

> If this hook was defined, it is called at the end of the method before returning state.

Reviewer 8: Let's be explicit there about what it does: is it replacing component's styles (just custom styles) or enhances them (default styles + custom styles)?

Author: As the customized hook can mergeClasses or overwrite the className, and we aren't taking on the requirement of shipping an unstyled Fluent React library, the default style hook will always be called and the custom style hook can  tweak or completely replace the styles.

> These example use Component as a substitute for a component like Button or Avatar.

```tsx
const customStyles = useContextSelector(ComponentCustomStylesContext, context => context?.useCustomStyles);

//...component styling here

return customStyles ? customStyles(state) : state;
```

Each component defines own types for props and state, so would need to define its own context value types,
context, and context provider.

```tsx
export type ComponentCustomStylesContextValue = {
  useCustomStyles?: (state: ComponentState) => ComponentState;
};

export const ComponentCustomStylesContext: Context<ComponentCustomStylesContextValue> = createContext<ComponentCustomStylesContextValue>(
  {},
);

> export const ComponentCustomStylesContextProvider = ComponentCustomStylesContext.Provider;

Reviewer 8: Do I correctly get that it's a provider per each component? I.e. `ButtonCustomStylesContextProvider`, `AvatarCustomStylesContextProvider` and etc.?

```jsx
function App() {
  return (
    <ButtonCustomStylesContextProvider value={{ useCustomStyles }}>
      <Button />
    </ButtonCustomStylesContextProvider>
  );
}
```

- There is no point to use `useContextSelector()` as `ComponentCustomStylesContextValue` could be just a function: it will also be a small performance improvement as `useContextSelector()` is not really free
- It will not work great if there are multiple versions of a `@fluentui/react-*` package ([problem with context singletons](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-components/global-context)) i.e. customizations may not be applied to some components

Author: Writing so many providers is one of the things that makes this option unwieldy for consumers and likely will be discarded in favor of something more lightweight. Understood (I think) about the context selector.

styling scope just like Fluent Provider. While they would need to use a provider per custom styled component,
these could be aggregated into a component that transcludes children.

```tsx
<App>
  <FluentProvider theme={webLightTheme}>
    <ComponentCustomStylesContextProvider value={{ useCustomStyles }}>
      {/* other component hierarchy */}
      <Component>Hello custom styles!</Component>
    </ComponentCustomStylesContextProvider>
  </FluentProvider>
</App>
```

### 👍

- Custom styling gets the same power as the default component useStyles hook.
- This builds on using slots as the addressable items for applying styles.
- The custom styles can be built using Griffel with build-time optimization.
- Can be applied at different scope like FluentProvider.
- Does not require composing or introducing a new component type that must be adopted in lieu of the default component.
- Fewer CSS specificity problems as styles can get overwritten.
- Provides the type-safety expected from Fluent UI React.
- Minimal code to add to each component. Could be put into the code generation template.

> - Does not significantly affect rendering performance.

Reviewer 8: I would measure it first: additional calls of `mergeClasses()` could be expensive if there is 1k `Button`s in a tree.

Author: As consumers customize, they would need to account for the increased cost of mergeClasses calls.  They could apply their class and the existing classes without mergeClasses if they want to avoid the overhead of the merge and take the potential duplication hit right?

- Partners building components can follow the same practice to support custom styling in their libraries.

### 👎

- Custom styling all components requires adding and configuring lots of context providers.
- Requires writing new code for every component, adding a story, and documenting the feature.
- Context is harder to discover as it is outside the props contract.

> - Callers doing custom styling may still take a dependency on the CSS internals of the component if they don't replace a

Reviewer 8: They can also break existing style overrides that components in a tree have. It could be a significant problem for HVCs that are embedded into apps: styles work in ProductA, but don't work in the same way in ProductB.

Author: Yeah - we will need to separately determine what our policy is on the CSS being an API that we consider to take breaking changes.

Each component would be recomposed.

For example, imagine this Button.tsx is defined in a partner component library to export a custom styled button.
The component exported is named `Button` so that it can replace Fluent UI's `Button`.

The partner would define the useCustomButtonStyles hooks to style the component however they like.
This could include exposing a similar centralized custom styling mechanism as in Option A or applying styles
through a different mechanism than Griffel (such as SASS, emotion, or tailwind).

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';
import { renderButton_unstable, useButton_unstable } from '@fluentui/react-components';
import type { ButtonProps, ForwardRefComponent } from '@fluentui/react-components';
import { useCustomButtonStyles } from '../styling/button';

export const Button: ForwardRefComponent<ButtonProps> = React.forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  const state = useButton_unstable(props, ref);
  useCustomButtonStyles(state);
  return renderButton_unstable(state);
}) as ForwardRefComponent<ButtonProps>;

Button.displayName = 'Button';
```

### 💡 Improvement - making recomposition easier with compose()

> Recomposing every component could be made easier with a compose method that hid some of the details of the ForwardRef

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Recomposing every component could be made easier with a compose method that hides some of the details of the ForwardRef
```

and sequencing the hook.

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';
import { compose } from '@fluentui/react-components';
import type { ButtonProps } from '@fluentui/react-components';
import { useCustomButtonStyles } from '../styling/button';

// This is a rough idea of what a compose method might look like.

> export const Button = compose<ButtonProps>('Button', useButton_unstable, useCustomButtonStyles, renderButton_unstable);

Reviewer 8: If we want to simplify styles and hide details, why we want to have bits not related to styling in API?

```js
export const Button = compose<ButtonProps>(Button, useCustomButtonStyles);
```

Should it be just something like that instead?

Author: Ben has been hard at work refining the composition/recomposition helpers.  He can propose and PR that separately.  I think this details the idea enough that we can evaluate option B as the 'don't build a separate escape-hatch for styling if we are all-in on recomposition'.

};
const useButtonStyles = makeResetStyles({
  backgroundColor: `var(${ButtonTokens.background}, ${tokens.colorBrandBackground})`,
  color: `var(${ButtonTokens.color}, ${tokens.colorNeutralForegroundOnBrand})`,
  border: '4px solid',
  ':enabled:not(:checked):not(:indeterminate)': {
    borderColor: `var(${ButtonTokens.border}, orange)`,
  },
});

const Button = props => {
  const styles = useButtonStyles();
  return (
    <button {...props} className={mergeClasses(styles, props.className)}>
      {props.children}
    </button>
  );
};
```

```tsx
// Customizing button via className
const useCustomButtonStyle = makeResetStyles({
  [ButtonTokens.background]: 'red',
  [ButtonTokens.color]: 'white',
  [ButtonTokens.border]: 'green',
  ':hover': {
    [ButtonTokens.background]: 'green',
    [ButtonTokens.color]: 'pink',
    [ButtonTokens.border]: 'blue',
  },
  ':active': {
    [ButtonTokens.background]: 'orange',
    [ButtonTokens.color]: 'black',
    [ButtonTokens.border]: 'purple',
  },
});

export const CustomButton = props => {
  const rootStyle = useCustomButtonStyle();
  return <Button className={rootStyle}>Hello</Button>;
};
```

```tsx
// making changes in composition

> const useCustomButtonStyle = makeResetStyles({

Reviewer 8: [You can't do multiple `makeResetStyles()` calls for a single element](https://griffel.js.org/react/api/make-reset-styles#limitations): something must be defined with `makeStyles()` instead.

  [ButtonTokens.background]: 'red',
  [ButtonTokens.color]: 'white',
  [ButtonTokens.border]: 'green',
  ':hover': {
    [ButtonTokens.background]: 'green',
    [ButtonTokens.color]: 'pink',
    [ButtonTokens.border]: 'blue',
  },
  ':active': {
    [ButtonTokens.background]: 'orange',
    [ButtonTokens.color]: 'black',
    [ButtonTokens.border]: 'purple',
  },
});

export const CustomButton: ForwardRefComponent<ButtonProps> = React.forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  const state = useButton_unstable(props, ref);
  const rootStyle = useCustomButtonStyle();
  state.root.className = rootStyle;
  useButtonStyles_unstable(state);

  return renderButton_unstable(state);
  // Casting is required due to lack of distributive union to support unions on @types/react
}) as ForwardRefComponent<ButtonProps>;
```

### 💡 Improvement - Explicit APIs for modifying commonly modified styles

checkboxCheckedBackground = 'foo' vs ':enabled:not(:checked):not(:indeterminate)': { background: 'foo'}

> ### 💡 Improvement - Perf - complex selectors are much slower than local CSS variables

Reviewer 8: Is there a PoC that proves this? CSS variables as we learnt before are not really free: https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/rfcs/react-components/convergence/theme-shape.md

Single className adding multiple css variables is much more performant than complex selectors targeting individual parts of the control

```
.foo {
  --a: green;
  --b: yellow;
}

vs

.foo:enabled:not(:checked):not(:indeterminate)' > svg
```

### 👍

### 👎

> 

Reviewer 8: With this option and next one it also unclear what values should tokens and what should not. Another requirement: tokens should be also consistent between components i.e. all use `foreground` or all use `color`.

Currently, v9 has mechanisms to support several customization scenarios:

- Custom themes => Customize style values for all components
- `classname` prop => Customize the style of one instance of a component
- Extended design tokens => Support theme for a custom component or custom class/style
- Hooks recomposition => Create a new component customizing the behavior, style, or rendering of an existing component.

See the appendix for more detailed analysis of the capabilities and limitations of each of these mechansisms.

## Problem

Partners migrating from v0/v8 to v9 have brought up that v9's custom styling does not provide the same granularity of
customization as previous versions. See the appendix for detailed partner use cases and scenarios.

Partners producing component libraries or component design surfaces are the most concerned about the lack of
customization. They would like to customize the style of a single type of component without changing the style of
other components.

Example: Change the border radius and border width of all Button components without changing those styles for
Input components.

## Option A: React.Context useCustomStyles hooks

> Each component could check context for a useCustomStyle hook within the useComponentStyle hook.

Reviewer 8: It's a side note, but we have currently a customer that has two different React roots coming from different bundles and rendered by different React versions. Example of this setup can be found in #26496.

Any option with content will require them to apply overrides to each root. It's not a blocker, but something to consider.

Author: Understood.  Adopters will need to deal with multiple bundles and roots for FluentProvider scope anyway.

- Partners building components can follow the same practice to support custom styling in their libraries.

### 👎

- Custom styling all components requires adding and configuring lots of context providers.
- Requires writing new code for every component, adding a story, and documenting the feature.
- Context is harder to discover as it is outside the props contract.
- Callers doing custom styling may still take a dependency on the CSS internals of the component if they don't replace a
  style block completely.

### 🤔 Centralized and singular custom styling method

It would be nice to have a single method on context that could apply for all components. This proves difficult
with each component having its own props and state types.

Another approach would be to define single context value type in the react-shared-contexts package that had
a method for each component, but that causes a circular dependency problem for components.

There may some typescript trickery that would allow for a single context value type, but having each component define
the context type it will inspect for custom styling follows SOLID dependency inversion.

> ## Option A2: Add global custom styling hook

Reviewer 8: Overall, "Option A" & "Option A2" are worrying as they encourage consumers to go against v9 philosophy around bundle size and remind me themes in v0:
- Current: "pay as you go", more components => more bundle size
- Proposed: "pay as you go" + _"global overrides without tree-shaking"_, more components => more bundle size + a piece on the top of application that can't be removed

Author: So an implementation that is a single method would have a switch but would end up depending on each of the components it customizes. This would prevent tree shaking out those components, right?

The property per component idea you have below that defined separate methods would avoid this singular dependency and allow tree-shaking right?

Reviewer 8: > So an implementation that is a single method would have a switch but would end up depending on each of the components it customizes. This would prevent tree shaking out those components, right?
> The property per component idea you have below that defined separate methods would avoid this singular dependency and allow tree-shaking right?

I am referring to the following scenario (https://codesandbox.io/s/determined-spence-fufbef):
- We have an app that loads some components lazily
- _The main part_ of an app uses `FluentProvider` & `Button` (light components)
- _The lazy part_ of an app uses `Popover`, `Menu` & `Table` (heavy components)
- I want to use this option to customize components

I have customizations for `Popover` & `Button`. What can I do?
- Place `CustomizationProvider` on top of an app before `FluentProvider` ➡️ customizations for `Popover` will be loaded even when I don't need them and will be in _the main part_
- Place `CustomizationProvider` on top of an app with `Button` overrides & inside _the lazy part_ with `Popover` overrides

The first option will affect bundle size more & more if overrides will grow as they will be always loaded. The second option needs more maintenance (if `Popover` will appear in _the main part_, overrides should be moved). May be I overestimate the problem, but this option is really powerful.

Author: I updated OptionA2 to follow your suggested approach of separate hooks per component and passing state:unknown.

A global custom styling hook would be defined. It takes a component kind and state.

> We experimented with several ways to try and make the method typesafe, but it proved
> either overly complex, forced conditional calls that would make hooks unstable,
> led to cirtcular references between packages, or restricted custom styling to the point
> of lower value as an escape hatch.

```tsx
export type FluentStyleCustomizer = {
  useCustomStyles_unstable: (kind: string, state: any) => void;
};

export const fuiCustomizer: FuiCustomizer = {
  useCustomStyles_unstable: () => {},
};
```

Components would call the custom styling hook immediately after their own styling hook.

> The kind passed to the custom style hook can be specific to library (e.g. 'FluentUI.Button').

```tsx
export const SomeComponent: ForwardRefComponent<SomeComponentProps> = React.forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  const state = useSomeComponent_unstable(props, ref);

>   useSomeComponentStyles_unstable(state);

Reviewer 7: I would like to discuss whether we always call the base styles hook.

Forget the rule of hooks for a second, why don't we just call the custom styles if it is set in the context and let it up to the partner to decide whether they want to call the original function and merge it with overrides or completely replace the styles with the custom ones (which would allow them to also use `useResetStyles()`?

Author: My only concern is that conditionally calling the custom style hook may lead people to unstable hook calls.  Of course, if the hook is set at app start then the number of hooks called would be the same across renders, but the conditional call still looks suspicious :)

  fuiCustomizer.useCustomStyles_unstable('SomeComponent', state);

  return renderSomeComponent_unstable(state);
  // Casting is required due to lack of distributive union to support unions on @types/react
}) as ForwardRefComponent<SomeComponentProps>;
```

Callers can customize styles by replacing the default useCustomStyles_unstable hook.

> Callers are encouraged to use Griffel to define styles.
> They can use makeStyles and mergeClasses to default, override, or replace
> The classes applied by the component style hook.
> A good implementation will switch to typesafe methods.

```ts
const useSomeComponentCustomStyles = (state: SomeComponentState) => {
  const styles = useStyles();

  if (state.active) {
  }
  state.root.className = mergeClasses(
    state.root.className,
    styles.root,
    state.size === 'small' && styles.small,
    state.size === 'medium' && styles.medium,
    state.size === 'large' && styles.large,
  );
};

fuiCustomizer.useCustomStyles_unstable = (kind: string, state: any) => {
  switch (kind) {
    case 'SomeComponent':
      useSomeComponentCustomStyles(<SomeComponentState>state);
      break;
    // case ...
  }

> };

Reviewer 8: I don't think it's scalable, imagine that that you to customize styles for 10 components.

Can't we simply do following?

```
export type FluentStyleCustomizer = {
  useCustomButtonStyles: (state: unknown) => void;
  useCustomSelectStyles: (state: unknown) => void;
  useCustomXStyles: (state: unknown) => void;
};
```

It's the same that is done a switch anyway. I also suggest to use `unknown`, so via type cast consumers can get proper types.

Author: We could.  I was trying to avoid needing to modify this every time we introduce a component.  Following the open for extension, closed for modification principle.

Reviewer 7: What Shift proposes would also mean the component would know whether there are any overrides present or not, allowing it for example to avoid calling the component styles hook.

Author: @miroslavstastny - we want to avoid conditionally calling a hook though right?  I was thinking we would initially have the global be a set of no-op implementations.

Author: Updated OptionA2 with Shift's suggested approach.  I like it better!

```

### 💡 Improvement - apply Typescript discriminant property technique

- Add a `kind: string` property to ComponentState

> - Each component state would redefine kind to retrict to their type (e.g. Button would have `kind: 'Button'`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Each component state would redefine kind to restrict customization to their type (e.g. Button would have `kind: 'Button'`).
```

- Remove kind parameter from useCustomStyles.
- Trying to cast to the wrong component state will fail.

### 👍

- Custom styling gets the same power as the default component useStyles hook.
- This builds on using slots as the addressable items for applying styles.
- The custom styles can be built using Griffel with build-time optimization.
- Single, centralized point of customization.
- Only one new type introduced (FluentStyleCustomizer)
- One line of code to add to each component.
- Does not significantly affect rendering performance.
- Partners building components can follow the same practice to support custom styling in their libraries.

> - Hooks is not conditionally called and should not lead to unstable hook react errors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Hooks are not conditionally called and should not lead to unstable hook react errors.
```

- Can restyle without having to recompile component libraries.

> - Global traverses multiple render roots.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Globally traverses multiple render roots.
```

### 👎

- Custom style hook state is not compile-time typesafe.

> - Very powerful. Only modifying classes is a implicit agreement.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Very powerful. Only modifying classes is an implicit agreement but state modification is possible.
```

- High performance of rendering and theme switching because of a limited number of CSS variables.

#### Limitations

- Cannot change a specific component type because Fluent 2 design tokens are general purpose and used by multiple components.
- Expensive to change a single instance of a component
- Difficult to discover which design tokens a component uses without reading the style hook code

### Extended Design Tokens

`FluentProvider` will also accept a theme with additional name/value pairs to define extended CSS variables.
Callers can use the `themeToTokensObject` method to get the set of tokens to be referenced when creating styles.

#### Capabilities

- Handles special cases where no appropriate Fluent 2 design token exists

#### Limitations

- Themes using extended tokens are fragile and not portable across applications
- Adding too many CSS variables degrades performance (limit is around ~300 tokens total)
- `themeToTokens` prevents tree-shaking of tokens

### `classname` Prop

All v9 components have a `className` prop which applies custom styles.
Each slot also has a `className` props which applies custom styles to a part of a component.

> Custom styles can be built with Griffel `makeStyles()` and `mergeClasses().

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Custom styles can be built with Griffel `makeStyles()` and `mergeClasses()`.
```

```tsx
export const Button: ForwardRefComponent<ButtonProps> = React.forwardRef((props, ref) => {
  const state = useButton_unstable(props, ref);

  useButtonStyles_unstable(state);

  const componentStyles = useComponentStyles();
  componentStyles.useCustomButtonStyles_unstable(state);

  return renderButton_unstable(state);
}) as ForwardRefComponent<ButtonProps>;
```

Like option A2, callers can define their custom style hooks object, but rather than replacing a global object,
they pass it to FluentProvider.

```ts
export const useFancyButtonStyles = (state: unknown) => {
  const styles = useStyles();

  const buttonState = state as ButtonState;

  buttonState.root.className = mergeClasses(
    buttonState.root.className,
    styles.root,
    buttonState.size === 'small' && styles.small,
    buttonState.size === 'medium' && styles.medium,
    buttonState.size === 'large' && styles.large,
  );
};
```

```tsx
const customStyles : ComponentStyleHooks = {
  useCustomButtonStyles_unstable = useFancyButtonStyles;
}

<App>
  <FluentProvider theme={webLightTheme} componentStyles={customStyles}>
      <Component>Hello custom styles!</Component>
  </FluentProvider>
</App>
```

### 👍

> - Same benefits of leveraging Griffle and slots. Additionally, leverage FluentProvider.

Reviewer 4: _nit:_

```suggestion
- Same benefits of leveraging Griffle and slots. Additionally, this solution leverages FluentProvider.
```

  const state = useButton_unstable(props, ref);
  const rootStyle = useCustomButtonStyle();
  state.root.className = rootStyle;
  useButtonStyles_unstable(state);

  return renderButton_unstable(state);
  // Casting is required due to lack of distributive union to support unions on @types/react
}) as ForwardRefComponent<ButtonProps>;
```

### 💡 Improvement - Explicit APIs for modifying commonly modified styles

checkboxCheckedBackground = 'foo' vs ':enabled:not(:checked):not(:indeterminate)': { background: 'foo'}

### 💡 Improvement - Perf - complex selectors are much slower than local CSS variables

Single className adding multiple css variables is much more performant than complex selectors targeting individual parts of the control

```
.foo {
  --a: green;
  --b: yellow;
}

vs

.foo:enabled:not(:checked):not(:indeterminate)' > svg
```

Composition approach would be difficult to adjust at runtime because css vars are already set on the root, and new styles would either need to replace the old one, be more specific, or not use makeResetStyles so user could override individual css vars

### 👍

> - Provides increased control of individual aspects of components similar to v8
> - Extends theming without introducing unused CSS vars
> - A less fragile API that the raw CSS customization through className

Reviewer 4: _nit:_ Add periods at the end of the sentences

```suggestion
- Provides increased control of individual aspects of components similar to v8.
- Extends theming without introducing unused CSS vars.
- A less fragile API that the raw CSS customization through className.
```

### 👎

- May break Griffel optimization as each var() with default would be a unique style.

> - Adopters providing customization of all components would likely introduce many component vars that would hurt performance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Adopters providing customization of all components would likely introduce a vast number component vars that that could hurt performance.
```
